In-silico protein structure prediction, i.e., sequence to structure, tackles one of the core questions in structural biology.
AlphaFold 3 has brought a paradigm shift in the field of structural biology by intertwining deep-learning (DL) tools with evolutionary data to predict single-chain structures with high accuracy.
Further, AlphaFold-multimer [4] (AFm) and related work [5,6] have demonstrated the utility of AlphaFold to predict protein complexes.
The association of proteins to form transient or stable protein complexes often involves binding-induced conformational changes.
Capturing conformational dynamics of protein-protein interactions is another grand challenge in structural biology, and many physics-based (computational) approaches have been used to tackle this challenge [2].
Computational tools have sampled the uncharted landscape of protein-protein interactions by emulating kinetic mechanisms such as conformer selection and induced-fit and by identifying energetically stable binding states.
However, these tools are hampered by the accuracy of the energy functions and the limitations of time and length scales for sampling.
In fact, AF-multimer (AFm) predicted accurate protein complexes in only 43% of cases in one recent study [1].
As the development of DL-based tools have unveiled ground-breaking performance in structure prediction, integration of a biophysical context has potential to strengthen prediction of protein assemblies and binding pathways.
Blind docking challenges prior to AF, particularly CASP13-CAPRI and CASP14-CAPRI experiments, reported high-quality predictions for only 8% targets [7,8].
With the availability of AF and AFm, the CASP15-CAPRI experiment stood as its first blind assessment for prediction of protein complexes and higher-order assemblies [9].
In this round, the docking community relied on AF and AFm for single-structure or complex predictions.
Given that AlphaFold generates a static three-dimensional structure, it has been unclear whether conformational diversity could be captured by AlphaFold.
In other terms, given a protein sequence, could AlphaFold generate ensembles of structures that include both unbound and bound conformations?
Additionally, can AlphaFold reveal intrinsic conformational heterogeneity?
To diversify model complexes generated with AlphaFold-multimer in the recent round of CASP15, predictors employed tuning parameters such as dropout [10], higher recycles on inference [11] or modulating the MSA inputs [12,13] with the amino acid sequence.
While these approaches demonstrated the ability to generate broader conformational ensembles, AFm performance still worsens with a higher degree of conformational flexibility between unbound and bound targets [1].
Prediction accuracies especially deteriorated in bound complex regions involving loop motions, concerted motions between domains, rearrangement of secondary structures, or hinge-like domain motions, i.e., large-scale conformational changes, which are also challenging for conventional docking methods [14].
Unlike state-of-the-art docking algorithms, AlphaFold’s output models incorporate a residue-specific estimate of prediction accuracy.
This suggests a few interesting questions: (1) Do the residue-specific estimates from AF/AFm relate to potential metrics demonstrating conformational flexibility?
(2) Can AF/AFm metrics deduce information about docking accuracy?
(3) Can we create a docking pipeline for in-silico complex structure prediction incorporating AFm to convert sequence to structure to docked complexes?
Recent work in physics-based docking approaches tested induced-fit docking [2], large ensembles [15], and fast-fourier transforms with improved energy functions [16] to capture conformational changes and better dock protein structures.
Coupling temperature replica exchange with induced-fit docking, ReplicaDock 2.02 achieved successful local docking predictions on 80% of rigid (unbound-to-bound root mean square deviation, RMSDUB < 1.1Å) and 61% medium (1.1 ≤ RMSDUB < 2.2 Å) targets in the Docking Benchmark 5.0 set [17].
However, like most state-of-the-art physics-based docking methods, ReplicaDock 2.0 performance was limited for highly flexible targets: 33% success rate on targets with RMSDUB ≥ 2.2 Å. Promisingly, by focusing backbone moves on known mobile residues (i.e., residues that exhibit conformational changes upon binding), ReplicaDock 2.0 sampling substantially improved the docking accuracy.
But the flexible residues must first, somehow, be identified.
Additionally, physics-based docking is quite slow (6-8 hrs on a 24-core CPU cluster) compared to recent DL based docking tools (0.1-10 minutes on a single NVIDIA GPU).
However, docking-specific DL tools such as EquiDock [18] and dMASIF [19] do not allow for protein flexibility, and recent tools like GeoDock [20], and DockGPT [21] have very limited backbone flexibility.
Further, all of these DL docking tools have low success rates on unbound docking targets such as those in Docking Benchmark 5.5 [20].
In this work, we combine the features of a top deep learning approach (AlphaFold-multimer [4]) with physics-based docking schemes (ReplicaDock 2.02) to systematically dock protein interfaces.
The overarching goal is to create a robust pipeline for easier, reproducible, and accurate modeling of protein complexes.
We investigate the aforementioned questions and create a protocol to resolve AFm failures and capture binding-induced conformational changes.
We first assess the utility of AFm confidence metrics to detect conformational flexibility and binding site confidence.
Next, we feed these metrics and the AFm-generated structural template to ReplicaDock 2.0, creating a pipeline we call AlphaRED (AlphaFold-initiated Replica Exchange Docking).
We test AlphaRED’s docking accuracy on a curated set of benchmark targets of bound and unbound protein structures of varying levels of binding-induced conformational change, including antibody-antigen interfaces, which additionally challenge AF2m due to the lack of evolutionary information across the interface [22,23].
In summary, we to assess the promise of combining the best of deep learning and biophysical approaches for predicting challenging protein complexes.
